for many learning algorithms among the
linear regression logistic regression
and neural networks the way we derive
the algorithm was by coming up with a
cost function or coming up with an
optimization objective and then using an
algorithm like gradient descent to
minimize that cost function when you
have a very large training set gradient
descent becomes a computationally very
expensive procedure in this video we'll
talk about a modification to the basic
gradient descent algorithm called
stochastic gradient descent which will
allow us to scale these algorithms to
much bigger training sets suppose you
are training a linear regression model
using gradient descent as the quick
recap the hypothesis will look like this
and the cost function will look like
this which is this sort of one-half of
the average squared error of your
hypothesis on your M training examples
and the cost function we've already seen
looks like this sort of bow shape
functions to plot it as a function of
the parameters theta0 and theta1 the
cost function J is the sort of a bowl
shape function and gradient descent
looks like this where in the inner loop
of gradient descent you repeatedly
update the parameters theta using that
expression now in the rest of this video
I'm going to keep using linear
regression as the running example but
the idea is here the idea of stochastic
gradient descent is fully general and
also applies to other learning
algorithms like logistic regression in
neural networks and other algorithms
that are based on training gradient
descent on the specific training set so
here's a picture of what gradient
descent does if the parameters are
initialized at a point there then as you
run gradient descent different
iterations of gradient descent will take
the parameters to the global minimum so
take a trajectory that looks like that
and heads pretty directly to the Google
woman
now the problem with gradient descent is
that if M is large then computing this
derivative term can be very expensive
because this requires summing over all M
examples so if M is 300 million so in
the United States there are about 300
million people and so the US would be
united states census data we have on the
order of that many records so if you
want to fit the linear regression model
to that then you need to sum over 300
million records and that's very
expensive to give the algorithm a name
this particular version of gradient
descent is also called batch gradient
descent and the term that refers to the
fact that we're looking at all of the
training examples at the time the cause
of a batch of all of the training
examples it really isn't maybe the best
thing but this is one machine learning
people call this particular version of
being in the center and if you imagine
really that you know you have 300
million census records stored away on
disk the way those album works is you
will need to read into your computer
memory all 300 million records in order
to compute this derivative term you need
to stream all of these records through
computer because you can't store all
your records and computer memories you
need to be through them and slowly you
know accumulate the sum in order to
compute the derivative and then having
done all that work that allows you to
take one step of gradient descent and
now you need to do the whole thing again
you know scan through all 300 million
records accumulate these sums and having
done all that work you can take another
little step using getting this end and
then do that again and then as you take
you had a third step and so on and so
it's gonna take a long time in order to
get the Apple to converge in contrast to
batch gradient descent what we're going
to do is come up with a different
algorithm that doesn't need to look at
all of the training examples you know in
every single iteration but that needs to
look at only a single training example
one iteration before moving on to the
new algorithm here's just a batch
gradient descent album written on the
game with that being the cost function
and that being the update and of course
this term here that's used in the
gradient descent rule that is the
partial derivative with respect to the
parameter theta J of our optimization
objective J train of theta now let's
look at the more efficient algorithm
that scales better to largely assess in
order to work out the algorithms cost
the Casagrande sent this write out the
cost function in a slightly different
way when I defined the cost of a
parameter theta with respect to a
training example X I comma Y to be equal
to 1/2 times the squared error that my
hypothesis incurs on that example exact
on the Y I so this cost function term
really measures how well is my
hypothesis doing on a single example X I
comma Y I now you notice that the
overall cost function J train can now be
written in this equivalent form so J
train is just the average over my M
training examples of the cost of my
hypothesis on that example X I comma Y
light island put this view of the cost
function for linear regression let me
now write out what stochastic gradient
descent does the first step of
stochastic gradient descent is to
randomly shuffle the data set so by that
I just mean randomly shuffle or randomly
reorder your M training examples
sort of a standard pre-processing step
come back to this in a minute
but the main work of stochastic gradient
descent is then done in the following
we're going to repeat for I equals 1
through m so repeatedly scan through my
training examples and perform the
following update to update the parameter
theta J as theta J minus alpha times H
of X I minus y I times thanks I okay and
we're going to do this update as usual
for all values of J now you notice that
this term over here this is exactly what
we have inside the summation for batch
gradient descent in fact but they'll see
you there are familiar of calculus as
possible to show that that term here is
this term here is equal to the partial
derivative respect my parameter theta J
of the cost of the parameters theta on X
I comma Y only where cost is of course
this thing that was defined previously
and just the rap of the algorithm let me
close my curly braces over there so
what's the cost of gradient descent is
doing is is actually scanning through
the training examples and first it's
going to look at my first training
example x1 comma y1 and then looking at
only this first example is going to take
like they see a little gradient descent
step with respect to the cost of justice
first training example so in other words
it's going to look at the first example
and modify the parameters a little bit
to fit just the first training example a
little bit better having done this
inside this in the for loop is then
going to go on to the second training
example
and what is going to do there is take
another little step in parameter space
so modify the parameters just a little
bit to try to fit just the second
training example a little bit better
having done that is then going to go on
to my third training example and modify
the parameters to fit to try to fit just
the third training example a little bit
better and so on
until you get through the entire
training set and then this outer repeat
loop may cause it to take multiple
passes over the entire training set this
view of stochastic gradient descent also
motivates why we wanted to start by
randomly shuffling the data set this
just ensures that when we scan through
the training set here that we end up
visiting the training examples and some
sort of randomly sorted order depending
on whether your data already came
randomly sorted or whether it came
originally sorted in some strange order
in practice this would just speed up the
convergence is the cost of gradient
descent just a little bit so in the
interest of safety is usually better to
randomly shuffle the data set if you
aren't sure if it came to you in the
randomly sorted order or not but more
importantly another view of stochastic
you in descent is that is a lot like
batch gradient descent they rather than
waiting to sum up these gradient terms
over all every training examples what
we're doing is we're taking this
gradient term using just one single
training example and we're starting to
make progress in improving the
parameters already so rather than you
know waiting till we've taken apart
through all 300,000 united states census
records say rather than needing to scan
through all of the training examples
before we can modify the parameters a
little bit and make progress towards a
global minimum for stochastic gradient
descent instead we just need to look at
a single training example and we'll
already start making progress in the
space of parameters to of moving the
parameters to us the global minima
so here's the algorithm written I'll
begin where the first step is the
randomly shuffle the data and the second
step is where the real work is done
where that's the update with respect to
a single training example X I comma Y I
so let's see what this algorithm does
the parameters previously we saw that
when we're using batch gradient descent
that is the algorithm that looks at all
the training examples of the time factor
in descent would tend to you know take a
reasonably straight line trajectory to
get to the global minimum like that in
contrast with stochastic gradient
descent every innovation is going to be
much faster because we don't need to sum
up over all the trainings of the
examples but every innovation is just
trying to fit a single training example
better so if we were to start stochastic
gradient descent
oh let's pass the cross between descend
at a point like that the first iteration
you know may take the parameters in that
direction and maybe the second iteration
looking at just a second example may be
just by chance we get a little unlucky
and actually head in a bad direction and
with two prongs like that in the third
iteration where we try to modify the
parameters to fit just the third
training examples better maybe we'll end
up heading in that direction and then we
look at the fourth training example and
we will do that the fifth example six
example seven and so on
and as you run the stochastic gradient
descent what you find is that it will
generally move the parameters in the
direction of the global minimum but not
always and so take a some more random
looking and circuited path towards the
global minimum and in fact as he runs to
Casa Grande descent it doesn't actually
converge in the same sense as batch
gradient descent us and what events are
doing is wandering around continuously
in some region that's in some region
close to the global minimum but it
doesn't actually just get to the global
minima
and stay there but the practice this
isn't a problem because you know so long
as the parameters end up in some region
there maybe it is pretty close to the
global minimum so lost parameters ends
up pretty close to the global minimum
that will be a pretty good hypothesis
and so usually running so costly in this
end we get the parameter near the global
minimum and that's good enough but you
know I'm always actually in most
practical purposes just one final detail
in stochastic drain descent we had this
outer loop repeat which says to do this
in a loop multiple times so how many
times do we repeat this outer loop
depending on the size of the training
set doing this just a single time may be
enough and up to you know maybe 10 times
maybe typical so you may end up
repeating this inner loop anywhere from
once to 10 times so if you have a you
know a truly massive data set like this
u.s. census data set example that I've
been talking about with 300 Minneapolis
it is possible that by the time you've
taken just a single pass through your
training set for I equals 1 through 300
million is possible but by the time you
take on a single pass for your dataset
you might already have a perfectly good
hypothesis in which case you know this
inner loop you might need to do only
once if M is very very large but in
general taking anywhere from 1 through
10 pulses through your data set you know
may be fairly common but they're really
it depends on the size of your training
set and if you contrast this to batch
gradient descent where battery and
descend after taking a pass through your
entire training set you would have taken
just one single gradient descent step so
one of these little baby steps of
gradient descent where you just take one
small gradient to sensor and this is why
so Casagrande descent can be much faster
so that was the stochastic gradient
descent algorithm and if you implement
it hopefully that will allow you to
scale what many of your learning
algorithms do much bigger data sets and
get much better performance that way